# 7

* * *

# Supporting Faces WriteBehindResponse

In JavaServer&trade; Faces 1.2, a JSP is the primary page format for
representing a Faces view. Faces provides a set of taglibs which developers
reference to describe their view. When a JSP is rendered, the Faces tag
implementations are invoked which constructs the view tree. After JSP processing
is complete, control returns to Faces which then renders the Faces markup by
rendering the view tree. Because JSP rendering and Faces (view) rendering occur
at different stages of the rendering phase, any output rendered within the JSP
itself (literal strings/static html or jsp/java rendered markup) will be output
before the Faces view markup regardless of whether it logically appears before
of after the Faces view description in the JSP. To preserve the natural order in
a JSP, Faces 1.2 utilizes an implementation dependent write behind mechanism
which generally uses the following pattern:

- Defines a response wrapper class/interface that includes implementation
dependent APIs.
- Implements its Faces `view` tag handler (and maybe others) to check if the
current response object (on the `ExternalContext`) supports the implementation
dependent API, and if so call the method to flush any existing (prior JSP)
output to the real response stream before processing the tag and building the
Faces `view`.
- Implements its `ViewHandler`, to replace the existing `ExternalContext`
response object with with one that implements the extended implementation
dependent API before dispatching to the JSP. And then once the dispatch has
returned, it restores the prior response object to the `ExternalContext`, renders
the Faces `view` and then calls another of the implementation dependent APIs on
the response object it dispatched with to output any remaining (buffered)
markup.

Because the JSF specification prescribes this behavior without formalizing the
mechanism, the bridge must. The bridge defines two formal mechanisms. One,
relies on a `ServletFilter` and was defined for the Portlet 1.0 Bridge because
`PortletResponseWrappers` weren't part of the portlet 1.0 specification. Its
support continues for backwards compatibility and for those Faces
implementations where the implementation of the bridge's second mechanism isn't
feasible. The second, mirrors the pattern described above using a
`PortletResponseWrapper` that implements a required bridge write behind interface
which supports and works in conjunction with the Faces implementation dependent
API needed by the (`view`) tag handlers.

The bridge is required to support both of these mechanisms simultaneously in its
provided ViewHandler
[[6.2.1](Chapter-6-Bridge-Requirements-for-Managing-Faces.html#6.2.1)].

## <a name="7.1"></a>7.1 Support via a ServletFilter

The bridge's `ServletFilter` mechanism is for use when either the Faces
implementation's mechanism can't be incorporated into the bridge's wrapper
mechanism or to continue (backwards compatibility) support from the Portlet 1.0
Bridge when portlet wrappers didn't exist. The bridge's responsibility is as
follows:

- Prior to dispatching to the JSP, the bridge's `ViewHandler` sets the
`javax.portlet.faces.RenderContentAfterView` attribute with a boolean value of
`Boolean.TRUE`.
- After the dispatch completes and the `ViewHandler` has rendered the Faces
view, the `ViewHandler` gets and outputs any write behind markup be reading the
request attribute `javax.portlet.faces.AfterViewContent` (containing either a
`byte[]` or `char[]`)

To enable and use this mechanism, the portlet developer implements and
configures a `ServletFilter` that has the following behavior:

- When invoked, if the `javax.portlet.faces.RenderContentAfterView` attribute
exists and has a value of `Boolean.TRUE`, wrap the incoming `ServletResponse`
with either the implementation dependent `ServletResponseWrapper` used by the
particular Faces implementation being used or one that supports its required API
and behavior. Replace the `ExternalContext response` object with this wrapper
caching the current one and then call the filter chain to execute the render.
- Upon completion, restore the `ExternalContext response` object, get the after
view content from the wrapped response using its proprietary API, and write this
content (as a `byte[]` or `char[]`) as the value of the request attribute
`javax.portlet.faces.AfterViewContent`.

### <a name="7.1.1"></a>7.1.1 Example Configuration

As a `ServletFilter`, the write behind filter is configured in the application's
`web.xml`. It should only be configured to filter included requests:

    <filter>
        <filter-name>myFacesRenderBehindPortletFilter</filter-name>
        <filter-class>org.apache.myfaces.portlet.faces.application.BridgeMyFacesRenderFilter</filter-class>
    </filter>

    <filter-mapping>
        <filter-name>myFacesRenderBehindPortletFilter</filter-name>
        <url-pattern>*.jspx</url-pattern>
        <dispatcher>INCLUDE</dispatcher>
    </filter-mapping>

    <filter-mapping>
        <filter-name>myFacesRenderBehindPortletFilter</filter-name>
        <url-pattern>*.jsp</url-pattern>
        <dispatcher>INCLUDE</dispatcher>
    </filter-mapping>
    
### <a name="7.1.2"></a>7.1.2 Version Considerations

The following Faces implementation versions implement its dependent write behind
behavior exclusively in a `ServletResponseWrapper` without independently
defining a non-Servlet dependent interface:

- Mojarra 1.2_03
- All released version of MyFaces 1.2 (current version is 1.2.9)

I.e. the Faces view tag handler(s) test to see if the response supports its
write behind behavior involves checking whether the response object is an
instance of the particular `ServletResponseWrapper` it has implemented.

Because, the bridge's write behind wrapper mechanism requires the behavior be
implemented in an object that both extends `PortletResponseWrapper` and
implements the `BridgeWriteBehindResponse` interface, this mechanism is
incompatible with the above versions. If the target runtime environment will
contain any of these versions, one must use this servlet filter mechanism to
support the write behind behavior.

### <a name="7.1.3"></a>7.1.3 Performance Considerations

Through the use of the request attribute to signal the filter to introduce its
support, the mechanism is designed to have negligible impact when invoked from
non-portlet requests. However, some overhead exists because the Servlet
container has to determine whether this filter should be called (i.e. if its an
include) and if invoked whether the filter needs to act (based on
existence/setting of the `javax.portlet.faces.RenderContentAfterView` attribute.
In addition, because this facility isn't provided by default; setting up the
filter requires extra configuration. Because many JSF/JSP pages aren't coded in
a manner that exhibits this ordering problem, portlet developers should keep the
above in mind when deciding whether enabling the filter in their application is
justified.

## <a name="7.2"></a>7.2 Support via Portlet 2.0 ResponseWrapper

The bridge's `PortletResponseWrapper` mechanism follows a pattern similar to
Faces `ServletResponseWrapper` mechanism. The bridge has the following
responsibility:

- In the bridge's `ViewHandler`, prior to dispatching to the JSP, replace the
existing `ExternalContext response` with one that subclasses the appropriate
phase's `PortletResponseWrapper` class and implements the bridge's
`javax.portlet.faces.BridgeWriteBehindResponse` interface.
- Dispatch to the JSP.
- Restore the prior `ExternalContext` response
- Call the wrapper's `hasWriteBehindMarkup()` method and if it returns `true`
and something hasn't already set the `javax.portlet.faces.AfterViewContent`
request attribute then hold onto the wrappers content for later output.
Otherwise, write its buffered content to the response.
- Render the Faces view.
- Output the (cached) after view content.

For this mechanism to work, the `PortletResponseWrapper` must additionally
support the particular Faces dependent API used by the (view) tag handler to
flush the prior view content. The particular wrapper used by the bridge is
configured by the portlet in `faces-config.xml`. In the absence of such
configuration, the bridge may use its own response wrapper that is designed to
work automatically in the Faces environments it targets. For example, where
Faces write behind implementations exist that have their tag handlers rely on
Java reflection to determine support, the implementation of the default response
wrapper should support any such additional APIs as needed by these
implementations to allow these classes to be used directly in the above
mechanism and achieve write behind behavior.

### <a name="7.2.1"></a>7.2.1 Configuring the Bridge to use a PortletResponseWrapper/WriteBehindResponse implementation

One configures the particular implementation of the `RenderResponseWrapper`
and/or `ResourceResponseWrapper` the bridge uses as the response object it
dispatches to in the bridge's `application-extension` section of the
`face-config.xml`<sup>[[7.1](TCK-Tests.html#7.1)]</sup>. The syntax for this is
described in `portlet2.0-bridge-faces1.2-faces-config-extensions.xsd`.

    <application>
        <application-extension>
            <bridge:write-behind-response-wrappers>
                <bridge:render-response-wrapper-class>
                    org.mypackage.MyWriteBehindRenderResponseWrapper
                </bridge:render-response-wrapper-class>

                <bridge:resource-response-wrapper-class>
                    org.mypackage.MyWriteBehindResourceResponseWrapper
                </bridge:resource-response-wrapper-class>
            </bridge:write-behind-response-wrappers>      
        </application-extension>
    </application>

### <a name="7.2.2"></a>7.2.2 Version Considerations

Mojarra version 1.2_03 tag handlers detect write behind support by using
`instanceof` a particular `ServletResponseWrapper` class. This class is
incompatible with this `PortletResponseWrapper` mechanism, hence only the
`ServletFilter` mechanism can be used to add write behind support.

Mojarra version 1.2_04 through 1.2_07 tag handlers detect write behind support
by using `instanceof` a particular interface (`InterleavingResponse`) the
response object might additionally implement. In such an environment, developers
need to implement and configure appropriate `PortletResponseWrapper` classes
that additionally implement both the `BridgeWriteBehindResponse` interface and
the `InterleavingResponse` interface.

Mojarra version 1.2.08 through current (1.2_13) tag handlers detect write behind
behavior by using Java reflection to detect if the response class implements the
needed method. The supported methods correspond to those methods defined in the
`InterleavingResponse` interface. The bridge should implement and use default
`PortletResponseWrapper` classes that not only implements the
`BridgeWriteBehindResponse` interface but also supports the methods defined in
the `InterleavingResponse` interface. In such circumstances, because reflection
is being used, the bridge can continue to be Faces implementation independent
yet still automatically support write behind behavior when run in one of these
versions. If a particular bridge doesn't naturally support these methods, a
developer can enable write behind support by configuring the application with
the same write behind `PorttletResponseWrapper`(s) that work for versions
1.2_04-1.2_07.

All (existing) MyFaces versions (1.2.2-1.2.9) tag handlers detect write behind
support by using `instanceof` a particular `ServletResponseWrapper` class. This
class is incompatible with this `PortletResponseWrapper` mechanism, hence only
the `ServletFilter` mechanism can be used to add write behind support.
